The most distinctive mark of quantity is that equality and inequality are predicated of it. Each of the aforementioned quantities is said to be equal or unequal. For instance, one solid is said to be equal or unequal to another; number, too, and time can have these terms applied to them; indeed, all those kinds of quantity that have been mentioned can.
That which is not a quantity can by no means, it would seem, be termed equal or unequal to anything else. One particular disposition or one particular quality, such as whiteness, is by no means compared with another in terms of equality and inequality but rather in terms of similarity. Thus, it is the distinctive mark of quantity that it can be called equal or unequal.
Those things are called relative, which, being either said to be of something else or related to something else, are explained by reference to that other thing. For instance, the word "superior" is explained by reference to something else, for it is superiority over something else that is meant. Similarly, the expression "double" has this external reference, for it is the double of something else that is meant. So it is with everything else of this kind. There are, moreover, other relatives, e.g., habit, disposition, perception, knowledge, and attitude. The significance of all these is explained by reference to something else and in no other way. Thus, a habit is a habit of something, knowledge is knowledge of something, and attitude is the attitude of something. So it is with all other relatives that have been mentioned. Those terms, then, are called relative, the nature of which is explained by reference to something else, with the preposition "of" or some other preposition being used to indicate the relation. Thus, one mountain is called great in comparison with another; for the mountain claims this attribute by comparison with something. Again, that which is called similar must be similar to something else, and all other such attributes have this external reference. It is to be noted that lying, standing, and sitting are particular attitudes, but "attitude" is itself a relative term. To lie, to stand, and to be seated are not themselves attitudes but take their names from the aforementioned attitudes.
It is possible for relatives to have contraries. Thus, virtue has a contrary, vice; these both being relatives; knowledge, too, has a contrary, ignorance. But this is not the mark of all relatives; "double" and "triple" have no contrary, nor indeed does any such term.
It also appears that relatives can admit variation of degree. For "like" and "unlike," "equal" and "unequal," have the modifications "more" and "less" applied to them, and each of these is relative in character: for the terms "like" and "unequal" bear a reference to something external. Yet, again, it is not every relative term that admits of variation of degree. No term such as "double" admits of this modification. All relatives have correlatives: by the term "slave," we mean the slave of a master; by the term "master," the master of a slave; by "double," the double of its half; by "half," the half of its double; by "greater," greater than that which is less; and by "less," less than that which is greater.
So it is with every other relative term; but the case we use to express the correlation differs in some instances. Thus, by "knowledge," we mean knowledge of the knowable; by "the knowable," that which is to be apprehended by knowledge; by "perception," perception of the perceptible; and by "the perceptible," that which is apprehended by perception.
Sometimes, however, reciprocity of correlation does not appear to exist. This comes about when a blunder is made and that to which the relative is related is not accurately stated. If a man states that a wing is necessarily relative to a bird, the connection between these two will not be reciprocal, for it will not be possible to say that a bird is a bird by reason of its wings. The reason is that the original statement was inaccurate, for the wing is not said to be relative to the bird qua bird, since many creatures besides birds have wings, but qua winged creature. If, then, the statement is made accurate, the connection will be reciprocal, for we can speak of a wing, having reference necessarily to a winged creature, and of a winged creature as being such because of its wings.
Occasionally, perhaps, it is necessary to coin words if no word exists by which a correlation can adequately be explained. If we define a rudder as necessarily having reference to a boat, our definition will not be appropriate, for the rudder does not have this reference to a boat qua boat, as there are boats that have no rudders. Thus, we cannot use the terms reciprocally, for the word "boat" cannot be said to find its explanation in the word "rudder." As there is no existing word, our definition would perhaps be more accurate if we coined a term like "ruddered" as the correlative of "rudder." If we express ourselves accurately in this way, at any rate the terms are reciprocally connected, for the ruddered thing is ruddered in virtue of its rudder. So it is in all other cases. A head will be more accurately defined as the correlative of that which is headed than as that of an animal, for the animal does not have a head qua animal, since many animals have no head.
Thus, we may perhaps most easily comprehend that to which a thing is related when a name does not exist, if from that which has a name we derive a new name and apply it to that with which the first is reciprocally connected, as in the aforesaid instances when we derived the word "winged" from "wing" and from "rudder."
All relatives, then, if properly defined, have a correlative. I add this condition because, if that to which they are related is stated haphazardly and not accurately, the two are not found to be interdependent. Let me state what I mean more clearly. Even in the case of acknowledged correlatives, and where names exist for each, there will be no interdependence if one of the two is denoted not by that name which expresses the correlative notion but by one of irrelevant significance. The term "slave," if defined as related not to a master but to a man, or a biped, or anything of that sort, is not reciprocally connected with that in relation to which it is defined, for the statement is not exact. Further, if one thing is said to be correlative with another, and the terminology used is correct, then, though all irrelevant attributes should be removed, and only that one attribute left in virtue of which it was correctly stated to be correlative with that other, the stated correlation will still exist. If the correlative of the slave is said to be the master, then, though all irrelevant attributes of the said master, such as "biped," "receptive of knowledge," "human," should be removed and the attribute "master" alone left, the stated correlation existing between him and the slave will remain the same, for it is of a master that a slave is said to be the slave. On the other hand, if, of two correlatives, one is not correctly termed, then, when all other attributes are removed and that alone is left in virtue of which it was stated to be correlative, the stated correlation will be found to have disappeared.
For suppose the correlative of the slave should be said to be the man, or the correlative of the wing to be the bird; if the attribute "master" is withdrawn from the man, the correlation between the man and the slave will cease to exist, for if the man is not a master, the slave is not a slave. Similarly, if the attribute "winged" is withdrawn from the bird, the wing will no longer be relative; for if the so-called correlative is not winged, it follows that the wing has no correlative.
Thus, it is essential that the correlated terms should be exactly designated; if there is a name existing, the statement will be easy; if not, it is doubtless our duty to construct names. When the terminology is thus correct, it is evident that all correlatives are interdependent.
Correlatives are thought to come into existence simultaneously. This is for the most part true, as in the case of the double and the half. The existence of the half necessitates the existence of that of which it is a half. Similarly, the existence of a master necessitates the existence of a slave, and that of a slave implies that of a master; these are merely instances of a general rule. Moreover, they cancel one another; for if there is no double, it follows that there is no half, and vice versa; this rule also applies to all such correlatives. Yet it does not appear to be true in all cases that correlatives come into existence simultaneously. The object of knowledge would appear to exist before knowledge itself, for it is usually the case that we acquire knowledge of objects already existing; it would be difficult, if not impossible, to find a branch of knowledge whose beginning was contemporaneous with that of its object.
Again, while the object of knowledge, if it ceases to exist, cancels at the same time the knowledge which was its correlative, the converse of this is not true. It is true that if the object of knowledge does not exist, there can be no knowledge, for there will no longer be anything to know. Yet it is equally true that if knowledge of a certain object does not exist, the object may nevertheless quite well exist. Thus, in the case of the squaring of the circle, if indeed that process is an object of knowledge, though it exists as an object of knowledge, the knowledge of it has not yet come into existence. Again, if all animals ceased to exist, there would be no knowledge, but there might yet be many objects of knowledge.
This is likewise the case with regard to perception; for the object of perception is, it appears, prior to the act of perception. If the perceptible is annihilated, perception also will cease to exist; but the annihilation of perception does not cancel the existence of the perceptible. For perception implies a body perceived and a body in which perception takes place. Now, if that which is perceptible is annihilated, it follows that the body is annihilated, for the body is a perceptible thing; and if the body does not exist, it follows that perception also ceases to exist. Thus, the annihilation of the perceptible involves that of perception.
But the annihilation of perception does not involve that of the perceptible. For if the animal is annihilated, it follows that perception also is annihilated, but perceptibles such as body, heat, sweetness, bitterness, and so on, will remain.
Again, perception is generated at the same time as the perceiving subject, for it comes into existence at the same time as the animal. But the perceptible surely exists before perception; for fire and water and such elements, out of which the animal is itself composed, exist before the animal is an animal at all, and before perception. Thus, it would seem that the perceptible exists before perception.
It may be questioned whether it is true that no substance is relative, as seems to be the case, or whether an exception is to be made in the case of certain secondary substances. With regard to primary substances, it is quite true that there is no such possibility, for neither wholes nor parts of primary substances are relative. The individual man or ox is not defined with reference to something external. Similarly, the parts—such as a particular hand or head—are not defined as a particular hand or head of a specific person, but rather as the hand or head of a particular person. It is also true, for the most part at least, in the case of secondary substances; the species man and the species ox are not defined with reference to anything outside themselves. Wood, again, is only relative in so far as it is someone's property, not in so far as it is wood. It is plain, then, that in the cases mentioned, substance is not relative.
However, with regard to some secondary substances, there is a difference of opinion; thus, such terms as "head" and "hand" are defined concerning that of which the things indicated are a part, and so it comes about that these appear to have a relative character. Indeed, if our definition of what is relative were complete, it would be very difficult, if not impossible, to prove that no substance is relative. If, however, our definition were not complete, and if those things are only properly called relative in the case of which relation to an external object is a necessary condition of existence, perhaps some explanation of the dilemma may be found.
The former definition does indeed apply to all relatives, but the fact that a thing is explained with reference to something else does not make it essentially relative. From this, it is plain that if a man definitely apprehends a relative thing, he will also definitely apprehend that to which it is relative. Indeed, this is self-evident: for if a man knows that some particular thing is relative—assuming that we call that a relative in the case of which relation to something is a necessary condition of existence—he also knows that to which it is related. For if he does not know at all that to which it is related, he will not know whether or not it is relative.
This is clear, moreover, in particular instances. If a man knows definitely that such and such a thing is double, he will also forthwith know definitely that of which it is the double. For if there is nothing definite of which he knows it to be the double, he does not know at all that it is double. Again, if he knows that a thing is more beautiful, it follows necessarily that he will forthwith definitely know that also than which it is more beautiful. He will not merely know indefinitely that it is more beautiful than something that is less beautiful, for this would be supposition, not knowledge. If he does not know definitely that than which it is more beautiful, he can no longer claim to know definitely that it is more beautiful than something else that is less beautiful, for it might be that nothing is less beautiful.
It is, therefore, evident that if a man apprehends some relative thing definitely, he necessarily knows that also definitely to which it is related. Now the head, the hand, and such things are substances, and it is possible to know their essential character definitely, but it does not necessarily follow that we should know that to which they are related. It is not possible to know forthwith whose head or hand is meant. Thus, these are not relatives; and, this being the case, it would be true to say that no substance is relative in character. It is perhaps a difficult matter, in such cases, to make a positive statement without more exhaustive examination, but raising questions with regard to details is not without advantage.
By quality, I mean that in virtue of which people are said to be such and such. Quality is a term that is used in many senses. One sort of quality let us call habit or disposition. Habit differs from disposition in being more lasting and more firmly established. The various kinds of knowledge and of virtue are habits, for knowledge, even when acquired only in a moderate degree, is, it is agreed, abiding in its character and difficult to displace unless some great mental upheaval takes place through disease or any such cause. The virtues, also—such as justice, self-restraint, and so on—are not easily dislodged or dismissed so as to give place to vice.
By a disposition, on the other hand, we mean a condition that is easily changed and quickly gives place to its opposite. Thus, heat, cold, disease, health, and so on are dispositions. For a man is disposed in one way or another with reference to these, but quickly changes, becoming cold instead of warm, ill instead of well. So it is with all other dispositions also, unless, through the lapse of time, a disposition has itself become inveterate and almost impossible to dislodge; in which case we should perhaps go so far as to call it a habit.
It is evident that men incline to call those conditions habits which are of a more or less permanent type and difficult to displace; for those who are not retentive of knowledge but are volatile are not said to have such and such a habit regarding knowledge, yet they are disposed, we may say, either better or worse, toward knowledge. Thus, habit differs from disposition in this: while the latter is ephemeral, the former is permanent and difficult to alter.
Habits are at the same time dispositions, but dispositions are not necessarily habits. For those who have some specific habit may be said also, in virtue of that habit, to be thus or thus disposed; but those who are disposed in some specific way do not always have the corresponding habit.
Another sort of quality is that in virtue of which, for example, we call men good boxers or runners, or healthy or sickly; in fact, it includes all those terms which refer to inborn capacity or incapacity. Such things are not predicated of a person in virtue of his disposition but in virtue of his inborn capacity or incapacity to do something with ease or to avoid defeat of any kind. Persons are called good boxers or good runners not in virtue of such and such a disposition but in virtue of an inborn capacity to accomplish something with ease. Men are called healthy in virtue of the inborn capacity for easy resistance to those unhealthy influences that may ordinarily arise; unhealthy, in virtue of the lack of this capacity. Similarly with regard to softness and hardness. Hardness is predicated of a thing because it has that capacity of resistance which enables it to withstand disintegration; softness, again, is predicated of a thing by reason of the lack of that capacity.
A third class within this category is that of affective qualities and affections. Sweetness, bitterness, sourness, are examples of this sort of quality, together with all that is akin to these; heat, moreover, and cold, whiteness, and blackness are affective qualities. It is evident that these are qualities, for those things that possess them are themselves said to be such and such by reason of their presence. Honey is called sweet because it contains sweetness; the body is called white because it contains whiteness; and so in all other cases.
The term affective quality is not used as indicating that those things which admit these qualities are affected in any way. Honey is not called sweet because it is affected in a specific way, nor is this what is meant in any other instance. Similarly, heat and cold are called affective qualities, not because those things that admit them are affected. What is meant is that these said qualities are capable of producing an affection in the way of perception. For sweetness has the power of affecting the sense of taste; heat, that of touch; and so it is with the rest of these qualities.
Whiteness and blackness, however, and the other colors, are not said to be affective qualities in this sense, but because they themselves are the results of an affection. It is plain that many changes of color take place because of affections. When a man is ashamed, he blushes; when he is afraid, he becomes pale, and so on. So true is this that when a man is by nature liable to such affections, arising from some concomitance of elements in his constitution, it is a probable inference that he has the corresponding complexion of skin. For the same disposition of bodily elements, which in the former instance was momentarily present in the case of an access of shame, might be a result of a man's natural temperament, so as to produce the corresponding coloring also as a natural characteristic. All conditions, therefore, of this kind, if caused by certain permanent and lasting affections, are called affective qualities. For pallor and duskiness of complexion are called qualities, inasmuch as we are said to be such and such in virtue of them, not only if they originate in natural constitution but also if they come about through long disease or sunburn and are difficult to remove, or indeed remain throughout life. For in the same way, we are said to be such and such because of these.
Those conditions, however, which arise from causes that may easily be rendered ineffective or speedily removed, are called not qualities but affections; for we are not said to be such by virtue of them. The man who blushes through shame is not said to be a constitutional blusher, nor is the man who becomes pale through fear said to be constitutionally pale. He is said rather to have been affected. Thus, such conditions are called affections, not qualities.
Thus, such conditions are called affections, not qualities. In like manner, there are affective qualities and affections of the soul. That temper with which a man is born and which has its origin in certain deep-seated affections is called a quality. I mean such conditions as insanity, irascibility, and so on; for people are said to be mad or irascible in virtue of these. Similarly, those abnormal psychic states which are not inborn but arise from the concomitance of certain other elements, and are difficult to remove or altogether permanent, are called qualities, for in virtue of them men are said to be such and such.
Those, however, which arise from causes easily rendered ineffective are called affections, not qualities. Suppose that a man is irritable when vexed: he is not even spoken of as a bad-tempered man when, in such circumstances, he loses his temper somewhat, but rather is said to be affected. Such conditions are therefore termed, not qualities, but affections.
The fourth sort of quality is figure and the shape that belongs to a thing; besides this, there are straightness and curvedness, along with any other qualities of this type. Each of these defines a thing as being such and such. Because it is triangular or quadrangular, a thing is said to have a specific character; or again, because it is straight or curved. In fact, a thing's shape in every case gives rise to a qualification of it.
Rarity and density, roughness and smoothness seem to be terms indicating quality; yet these, it would appear, really belong to a class different from that of quality. For it is rather a certain relative position of the parts composing the thing thus qualified which, it appears, is indicated by each of these terms. A thing is dense owing to the fact that its parts are closely combined with one another; rare, because there are interstices between the parts; smooth, because its parts lie, so to speak, evenly; rough, because some parts project beyond others.
There may be other sorts of quality, but those that are most properly so called have, we may safely say, been enumerated.
These, then, are qualities, and the things that take their name from them as derivatives, or are in some other way dependent on them, are said to be qualified in some specific way. In most, indeed in almost all cases, the name of that which is qualified is derived from that of the quality. Thus, the terms whiteness, grammar, and justice give us the adjectives white, grammatical, just, and so on.
There are some cases, however, in which, as the quality under consideration has no name, it is impossible that those possessed of it should have a name that is derivative. For instance, the name given to the runner or boxer, who is so called in virtue of an inborn capacity, is not derived from that of any quality; for both those capacities have no name assigned to them. In this, the inborn capacity is distinct from the science with reference to which men are called, e.g., boxers or wrestlers. Such a science is classed as a disposition; it has a name and is called boxing or wrestling, as the case may be, and the name given to those disposed in this way is derived from that of the science. Sometimes, even though a name exists for the quality, that which takes its character from the quality has a name that is not a derivative. For instance, the upright man takes his character from the possession of the quality of integrity, but the name given him is not derived from the word "integrity." Yet this does not occur often.
We may therefore state that those things are said to be possessed of some specific quality which have a name derived from that of the aforesaid quality or which are in some other way dependent on it.
One quality may be the contrary of another; thus, justice is the contrary of injustice, whiteness of blackness, and so on. The things, also, which are said to be such and such in virtue of these qualities may be contrary to one another; for that which is unjust is contrary to that which is just, and that which is white is contrary to that which is black. This, however, is not always the case. Red, yellow, and such colors, though qualities, have no contraries.
If one of two contraries is a quality, the other will also be a quality. This will be evident from particular instances if we apply the names used to denote the other categories. For instance, granted that justice is the contrary of injustice and justice is a quality, injustice will also be a quality; neither quantity, nor relation, nor place, nor indeed any other category but that of quality will be applicable properly to injustice. So it is with all other contraries falling under the category of quality.
Qualities admit of variation in degree. Whiteness is predicated of one thing in a greater or lesser degree than of another. This is also the case with reference to justice. Moreover, one and the same thing may exhibit a quality in a greater degree than it did before: if a thing is white, it may become whiter.
Though this is generally the case, there are exceptions. For if we should say that justice admitted of variation in degree, difficulties might ensue, and this is true with regard to all those qualities which are dispositions. There are some, indeed, who dispute the possibility of variation here. They maintain that justice and health cannot very well admit of variation in degree themselves, but that people vary in the degree in which they possess these qualities, and that this is the case with grammatical learning and all those qualities which are classed as dispositions. However that may be, it is an incontrovertible fact that the things which in virtue of these qualities are said to be what they are vary in the degree in which they possess them; for one man is said to be better versed in grammar or more healthy or just than another, and so on.
The qualities expressed by the terms triangular and quadrangular do not appear to admit of variation in degree, nor indeed do any that have to do with figure. For those things to which the definition of the triangle or circle is applicable are all equally triangular or circular. Those, on the other hand, to which the same definition is not applicable cannot be said to differ from one another in degree; the square is no more a circle than the rectangle, for to neither is the definition of the circle appropriate. In short, if the definition of the term proposed is not applicable to both objects, they cannot be compared. Thus, it is not all qualities which admit of variation in degree.
